[[pandit, 2022]]
# 5.3.2.3 Extending ontologies for GDPR
The PROV-O and P-Plan ontologies were extended to represent concepts and relationships of ex-ante and ex-post activities associated with personal data and consent based on requirements of GDPR compliance. The decision to extend PROV-O and P-Plan with GDPR concepts was made as both ontologies contain generic concepts associated with activities and workflows which can be used for representing information about GDPR compliance, but doing so would be not be intuitive due to difference in terminology and structuring of information as expected for GDPR compliance.

Extending existing ontologies of PROV-O and P-Plan enables expressing a ‘template’ or ‘plan’ using p-plan:Plan describing ex-ante activities (as p-plan:Step) that can take place. This template can then be used to denote execution of activities in ex-post phase using p-plan:Activity. This provides a machine-readable and documented information model for both ex-ante and ex-post activities whose provenance itself can be expressed (using PROV-O and P-Plan) to record how they were created and how they change over time. This is beneficial in documenting state of a system at a given time through a set of activities that deal with consent and personal data, and can be helpful in determining changes to be made based on changes in processing of personal data over time.

The extended ontology derived from PROV-O and P-Plan incorporates concepts and relationships associated with GDPR in order to normalise terminology for representing information associated with GDPR compliance. Concepts and relationships are derived from competency questions and linked with relevant clauses within GDPR through using GDPRtEXT concepts using rdfs:isDefinedBy and rdfs:seeAlso. This provides documentation regarding origin of concepts and their use in representation of information associated with specific clauses of GDPR. It also provides a machine-readable link from the ontology to GDPR which can be used to compare, analyse, and align relevant ontologies.

The extension consists of sub-classing existing concepts in PROV-O and P-Plan to represent specific activities associated with GDPR compliance. The use of subclass mechanism preserves existing concepts and relationships of PROV-O and P-Plan to provide compatibility and reuse. This is particularly important for PROV-O as it is a W3C standard and therefore is more likely to have existing uses. The compatibility with PROV-O also enables information defined using the ontology to be bundled as an artefact to record its provenance and planning as a form of meta-documentation regarding planning and maintenance of compliance activities This is particularly useful to maintain periodic snapshots of organisational processes associated with compliance and provides opportunities to automate querying and validation of information within a use-case - as demonstrated in Chapter 6.