Reference: http://www.tara.tcd.ie/bitstream/handle/2262/91583/chapter.pdf?sequence=1

The World Wide Web Consortium, abbreviated as W3C, is the standards body responsible for information exchange on the Web, which itself is based on the standards and protocols of the Internet. Due to the ever-increasing usage of the Web as a medium for providing services and information, it is important to consider standards that can be readily integrated into mediums such as web pages and web services that form the backbone of interoperability for many organisations, both commercial as well as public institutions. An example of this is email, which is ubiquitous with the Web and illustrates how standards can foster better interoperability. W3C terms its standards as ‘Recommendation’ to signify its agreement over time by community and members, which reflects its recommended usage rather than adoption as a requirement.

For representing information, W3C has several standards regarding data formats such as XML, CSV, and JSON. These formats provide specifications for the encoding of information into interoperable data streams. The Resource Description Framework (‘RDF 1.1 Primer’, 2014), or RDF, is a family of specifications that were initially defined as a metadata model but has since been used to model information as web resources. RDF supports several data serialisation formats, including XML and JSON (through JSON-LD), making its usage and adoption easier for information interoperability. RDF allows expression of facts as triples consisting of the subject-predicate-object pattern. This allows the expression of knowledge as a directed graph using a collection of RDF statements, which enables sharing data representations in a consistent manner.

The Web Ontology Language (‘OWL 2’, 2012), or OWL, is a family of languages for knowledge representations and modelling ontologies using formal semantics built upon RDF. The use of OWL to build schemas (or ontologies) allows the expression and inference of knowledge as well as the use of semantic reasoning. This has attracted interest in the academic as well as industrial community, and there are several public ontologies, with notable examples found in the library and bio-science domains. For querying information declared using RDF, there are mechanisms such as SPARQL (‘SPARQL 1.1 Query Language’, n.d.) and XQuery (‘XQuery’, 2017) that operate on standardised forms of data (RDF and XML respectively). Approaches for validating the structure of information defined using RDF include the Shapes Constraint Language (Knublauch & Kontokostas, 2017), which is a W3C Recommendation. To take advantage of the interoperability offered by commonly used formats such as CSV and JSON, there is ongoing work in creating a standard combining these approaches with RDF. Notable examples for this include CSV on the Web (Tennison, 2016) and JSON-LD (‘JSON-LD’, 2014). As their names imply, the former uses CSV and the latter JSON. The reuse and combination of standards provide interoperability as well as commonality towards the underlying technology utilised to create, store, and query information represented by these standards. This demonstrates the advantage of combining existing standards towards additional functionality and semantics while ensuring their backward compatibility for technical adoption.

In terms of GDPR, and the information categorised discussed earlier, W3C standards enable the representation of information based on standards that enable machine-readable metadata using RDF, querying using SPARQL and validation using SHACL. In addition, OWL can be used to formulate logic into the metadata to express the interdependencies and relationships inherent in the data. This is especially relevant with the recent interest and trend towards utilising knowledge-graphs where capturing semantics and relationships in the data is of essence. In such a system, GDPR compliance is based on utilising the system to identify the essential information and associate its adherence and validation towards specific clauses for compliance. This has made possible by interpreting the text and concepts of the GDPR itself as machine-readable metadata using RDF in order to link or associate information with its specific clauses (European Union, Publications Office, & ELI Task Force, 2015; Pandit, Fatema, O’Sullivan, & Lewis, 2018)

The Provenance Data Model (Lebo et al., 2013), or PROV, is a W3C Recommendation that provides definitions for interchange of provenance information, which consists of entities and relations between them such as “generated by”, “derived from”, and “attributed to”. PROV was designed to be generic and domain-independent and needs to be extended to address the requirements to represent workflow templates and executions. There are existing approaches in academia that utilise PROV for representing provenance information related to GDPR. Examples include representing the state of a system as a template (Pandit & Lewis, 2017) and representing and maintaining processing logs (Kirrane et al., 2018).

The Open Digital Rights Language (Iannella & Villata, 2018), abbreviated as ODRL, is a W3C Recommendation for policy expression language that provides a flexible and interoperable information model, vocabulary, and encoding mechanisms for representing statements about the usage of content and services. The ODRL Information Model describes the underlying concepts, entities, and relationships that form the foundational basis for the semantics of the ODRL policies. Policies are used to represent permitted and prohibited actions over a certain asset, as well as the obligations required to be met by stakeholders. Policies may furthermore be limited by constraints (e.g., temporal or spatial constraints), and duties (e.g. payments) may be imposed on permissions. ODRL can be utilised for representing agreements, which can include both data sharing agreements as required for Data Controllers and Data Processors, as well as for interpreting GDPR requirements as a policy for compliance checking (Vos, Kirrane, Padget, & Satoh, 2019).