
"**Provenance records**

Provenance in this case refers to information about entities and activities involved in the compliance process where a record is required to be kept and exchanged for compliance purposes. For example, GDPR requires controllers and processors to maintain provenance records of processing activities carried out under their responsibility in order to maintain and demonstrate compliance to supervisory authorities. Provenance records are also required to be maintained to enable provision of rights to data subjects, and for information sharing between controllers and third parties.

The information stored within provenance records is related to demonstrating compliant processing of personal data and fulfilment of obligations towards demonstration of compliance. They are modelled within state of the art (see Chapter 3) variously as logs, life-cycles, workflows, activities, and process flows. The term provenance in this case refers to both ex-ante and ex-post phases and is indicative of provenance of information to specify its existence. Therefore provenance in ex-ante phase means record of a model or plan used to indicate future processing of personal data, while that in ex-post phase refers to record or log of processing.

Since provenance information as described above encompasses information about artefacts and processes related to compliance, sharing this information in an interoperable format with other entities benefits both in their obligations regarding compliance. For example, controllers and supervisory authorities sharing interoperable compliance documentation can use the same set of tools and approaches for interacting with information. Also, by recording processes associated with compliance as provenance records, the same interoperable methods can be used to maintain, document, and demonstrate compliance. This is especially useful where information is to be shared between joint controllers and processors that need to exchange plans of processing for agreement as well as logs for successful implementations.

Since a data controller is required to ensure their intended activities are compliant as well as maintain records of processing activities regarding use of personal data, provenance records to be documented consist of intended plan of processing activities and their execution. Similarly, provenance records of consent requests and provision also need to be maintained to demonstrate compliance. Given the similarity in requirements for maintaining provenance records for different reasons, it is beneficial to provide a singular interoperable representation of provenance activities in a form that can capture and represent all aspects of provenance records required for compliance."

Reference: [[pandit, 2022]], available [here](http://www.tara.tcd.ie/bitstream/handle/2262/92446/PhD_Thesis_submitted_hardbound_print.pdf?sequence=3&isAllowed=y#page=100), p. 100.